docs/web/sdk-components-hooks.mdx, before:

---
title: Component Hooks
description: VertiGIS Studio Web - Learn about the React hooks used to react to changes on a component's model
---

VertiGIS Studio Web provides a number of [React hooks](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-intro.html) to ease development of custom components bound to [models](sdk-components-reference.mdx#models). These hooks make it simple to follow the recommended observable properties pattern for model interactions within your functional components.

## `useWatchAndRerender`

Watches an object for changes in one or more properties of a component model and triggers a re-render of the component.

### The Problem

In VertiGIS Studio Web, [component models](sdk-components-reference.mdx#models) provide a way to decouple components from data source concerns and app interactions. However, they raise the issue of consistency - how can a component stay up to date with changes in the data of the underlying model? E.g. how does the React component know when to re-render?

### The Solution

VertiGIS Studio Web components solve this problem by providing a way to update the UI when the data in the underlying model changes using a React hook called `useWatchAndRerender`. The component render lifecycle is as follows:

1. The initial data is pulled from the model and rendered.
1. The component **starts to watch for changes** to the specified properties on the model by using the `useWatchAndRerender` React hook.
1. The value of the watched property in the model changes. In the example below it changes as a result of a button click.
1. The hook that is watching the property value for changes causes the component to re-render with the new property value.

```tsx
import { useWatchAndRerender } from "@vertigis/web/ui";
import Typography from "@vertigis/web/ui/Typography";
import React from "react";
import { LayoutElement } from "@vertigis/web/components";
import Button from "@vertigis/web/ui/Button";

export default function CustomComponent(props) {
    const { model } = props;

    // Start watching for changes to the hidden property on the model
    useWatchAndRerender(model, "hidden");

    return (
        <LayoutElement {...props}>
            {/* Change the underlying model to trigger a re-render */}
            {model.hidden && (
                <Button onClick={() => (model.hidden = false)}>
                    Show Me
                </Button>
            )}
            {!model.hidden && (
                <div>
                    <Typography variant="h1">BOO!</Typography>
                    <Button onClick={() => (model.hidden = true)}>
                        Hide Me
                    </Button>
                </div>
            )}
        </LayoutElement>
    );
}
```

The role of the "watch" functions for a component with respect to model data is similar to the role of the [`useState` and `useEffect` functions](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-state.html) with respect to the local state data. The `useWatchAndRenderer` function essentially defines a model property as state your component's presentation is dependent upon, much like `useState`, while leaving you the responsibility to update the underlying component when appropriate. The `useWatch` function defines a dependency on a model property, while leaving you to define what side effects are required, much like `useEffect`.

## `useWatchCollectionAndRerender`

Watches a collection for change events and triggers a re-render. Conceptually equivalent to [`useWatchAndRerender`](#usewatchandrerender) but specifically for [Collection objects](https://developers.arcgis.com/javascript/latest/api-reference/esri-core-Collection.html).

## `useWatch`

Watches an object for changes in one or more properties and triggers a callback.

## `useSubscribeAndRerender`

Subscribes [to an event](sdk-events-overview.mdx) and triggers a re-render.

## `useSubscribe`

Subscribes [to an event](sdk-events-overview.mdx) and triggers a callback.

Commit message:

Add new Observability page to Web SDK (#99)
* Added new Observability page to web sdk. Fixed syntax error in observable log post.

* Fixing blog post url sp (confirmed that it was ok to do this even though the blog post is already up). Adding some words to cspell.

* Fixing link to blog post

* Apply suggestions from code review

Co-authored-by: Felicity Rhone <62772237+Felicity-R@users.noreply.github.com>

---------

Co-authored-by: Felicity Rhone <62772237+Felicity-R@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/web/sdk-components-hooks.mdx, after:

---
title: Component Hooks
description: VertiGIS Studio Web - Learn about the React hooks used to react to changes on a component's model
---

VertiGIS Studio Web provides a number of [React hooks](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-intro.html) to ease development of custom components bound to [models](sdk-components-reference.mdx#models). These hooks make it simple to follow the recommended [observable properties pattern](sdk-observability.mdx) for model interactions within your functional components.

## `useWatchAndRerender`

Watches an object for changes in one or more properties of a component model and triggers a re-render of the component.

### The Problem

In VertiGIS Studio Web, [component models](sdk-components-reference.mdx#models) provide a way to decouple components from data source concerns and app interactions. However, they raise the issue of consistency - how can a component stay up to date with changes in the data of the underlying model? E.g. how does the React component know when to re-render?

### The Solution

VertiGIS Studio Web components solve this problem by providing a way to update the UI when the data in the underlying model changes using a React hook called `useWatchAndRerender`. The component render lifecycle is as follows:

1. The initial data is pulled from the model and rendered.
1. The component **starts to watch for changes** to the specified properties on the model by using the `useWatchAndRerender` React hook.
1. The value of the watched property in the model changes. In the example below it changes as a result of a button click.
1. The hook that is watching the property value for changes causes the component to re-render with the new property value.

```tsx
import { useWatchAndRerender } from "@vertigis/web/ui";
import Typography from "@vertigis/web/ui/Typography";
import React from "react";
import { LayoutElement } from "@vertigis/web/components";
import Button from "@vertigis/web/ui/Button";

export default function CustomComponent(props) {
    const { model } = props;

    // Start watching for changes to the hidden property on the model
    useWatchAndRerender(model, "hidden");

    return (
        <LayoutElement {...props}>
            {/* Change the underlying model to trigger a re-render */}
            {model.hidden && (
                <Button onClick={() => (model.hidden = false)}>
                    Show Me
                </Button>
            )}
            {!model.hidden && (
                <div>
                    <Typography variant="h1">BOO!</Typography>
                    <Button onClick={() => (model.hidden = true)}>
                        Hide Me
                    </Button>
                </div>
            )}
        </LayoutElement>
    );
}
```

The role of the "watch" functions for a component with respect to model data is similar to the role of the [`useState` and `useEffect` functions](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-state.html) with respect to the local state data. The `useWatchAndRenderer` function essentially defines a model property as state your component's presentation is dependent upon, much like `useState`, while leaving you the responsibility to update the underlying component when appropriate. The `useWatch` function defines a dependency on a model property, while leaving you to define what side effects are required, much like `useEffect`.

## `useWatchCollectionAndRerender`

Watches a collection for change events and triggers a re-render. Conceptually equivalent to [`useWatchAndRerender`](#usewatchandrerender) but specifically for [Collection objects](https://developers.arcgis.com/javascript/latest/api-reference/esri-core-Collection.html).

## `useWatch`

Watches a property of an object that is [observable](sdk-observability.mdx) for changes and triggers a callback.

## `useWatchInit`

Watches a property of an object that is [observable](sdk-observability.mdx) for changes and triggers a callback. The callback will also be invoked immediately on first render.

## `useSubscribeAndRerender`

Subscribes [to an event](sdk-events-overview.mdx) and triggers a re-render.

## `useSubscribe`

Subscribes [to an event](sdk-events-overview.mdx) and triggers a callback.
