docs/workflow/sdk-server-overview.mdx, before:

---
title: Using the .NET Workflow SDK with VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server
sidebar_label: SDK Overview
description: VertiGIS Studio Workflow - Overview of extending workflow for VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server
---

import useBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import UseCaseContainer from "../../src/components/UseCaseContainer";
import UseCaseCard from "../../src/components/UseCaseCard";
import SdkLimitationsWarning from "./snippets/sdk-net-limitations-warning.mdx";

VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server can be extended by augmenting your on-premises installation with additional custom .NET assemblies.

## Requirements

Extending VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server requires administrative access to your on-premises installation of workflow.

## Development Environment

Visual Studio 2022 is the only officially supported development environment for extending VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server.

## Setting up a VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server Extension Project

Extending VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server requires you to produce a separate assembly with your custom activities, and copy that into your on-premises deployment of VertiGIS Studio Workflow. We first need to set up a project using Visual Studio that references the [workflow runtime](key-concepts.mdx#vertigis-studio-workflow-designer-and-runtime).

1. Launch Microsoft Visual Studio 2022.
1. Create a new project of type _Class Library_ (.NET Standard)
    - You can also create a project of type [.NET](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/learn/dotnet/what-is-dotnet) to take advantage of its larger feature set. If so, you need to go into the project settings and change the output type to `Class Library`
1. Edit the `.csproj` file in a text editor and add the `CopyLocalLockFileAssemblies` attribute to the `PropertyGroup`.

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.1</TargetFramework>
    <RootNamespace>CustomWorkflow</RootNamespace>
    // highlight-next-line
    <CopyLocalLockFileAssemblies>true</CopyLocalLockFileAssemblies>
</PropertyGroup>
```

-   This will copy the referenced nuget assemblies to the build output folder, which will be important for later.

1. [Add a reference](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/ide/how-to-add-or-remove-references-by-using-the-reference-manager?view=vs-2019) to the `VertiGIS.Workflow.Runtime` assembly.
   By default, this is located in`C:\Program Files\VertiGIS\VertiGIS Studio Workflow\Deployment\service`

:::info Important
.NET Standard projects **must** target .NET Standard 2.1, and .NET projects must target .NET 6.0, or else the assembly will be incompatible with VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server.
:::

<SdkLimitationsWarning />

Next, learn how to implement a [custom activity](tutorial-server-calculate-logarithm-activity.mdx) for VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server.

## Deploying VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server Activities

For VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server to find your custom activities, you need to copy the build output to a particular folder.

1. Build the project.
1. Find the build output on disk.
    1. In Visual Studio, right-click on your project in Solution Explorer and choose "Open Folder in File Explorer".
    1. Open the `bin` folder.
       If you do not see a`bin` folder, it is possible you right-clicked on the solution instead of the project.
    1. In the `bin` folder, open either `Debug` or `Release`, depending on which build configuration you used.
    1. In the `bin\Debug` or `bin\Release` folder, there will be one final sub-directory which will be `netstandard2.1`
       or `net6.0`. Open this folder.
    1. You should now see a number of files including `VertiGIS.Workflow.Runtime.dll` and your own project, such as `AssemblyNamespace.dll`.
1. Find the `CustomAssemblies` folder on disk.
    1. VertiGIS Studio Workflow looks in a folder called `CustomAssemblies` for assemblies that contain custom activities.
       This is located in the folder that you chose when installing VertiGIS Studio Workflow. The default location is
       `C:\Program Files\VertiGIS\VertiGIS Studio Workflow\CustomAssemblies`
1. Copy the relevant files from the build output to the `CustomAssemblies` folder.
    1. Copy your project's assembly. (e.g. `AssemblyNamespace.dll`)
    1. Copy any third-party libraries that your project relies on (these should have been output to the build folder)
    1. Copy any other configuration files or resources that your project relies on.
    1. **Do not** copy any files that start with `VertiGIS.Workflow.` They are not required in this folder.

:::note
If you created a .NET Project and see `AssemblyNamespace.exe`, you need to change the project output type to `Class Library`.
:::

:::info Important
You may need to stop VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server in IIS in order to copy your copy your custom code.
:::

## Debugging Server Workflow Activities

You can debug custom VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server activities by attaching to the VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server process from the VertiGIS Studio Workflow extension project you created.

1. Start Visual Studio 2022 with administrator privileges.
2. [Attach the debugger](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/debugger/debug-multiple-processes?view=vs-2019#BKMK_Attach_to_a_process) to the running `GeocortexWorkflowServer.exe` process.
    - You may need to check 'show processes from all users' to see it.
3. Set a breakpoint in your custom activity.
4. Run your server workflow that uses the custom activity. Your breakpoint should be hit.

## Automating Deployment of Server Workflow Activities

To automate the deployment to VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server, we have to add a post build step to the project that copies the build output.

1. Locate the `Custom Assemblies` folder in the VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server installation. The default location is `C:\Program Files\VertiGIS\VertiGIS Studio Workflow\CustomAssemblies`
2. Create a file `excluded_files.txt` at the root of the project that excludes the appropriate build output files as described in the [deployment section](#deploying-vertigis-studio-workflow-server-activities).

```
VertiGIS.Workflow.Runtime.dll
VertiGIS.Workflow.Runtime.xml
```

2. Edit the post build event in the project properties.
    - Add a command which copies the build output to the `Custom Assemblies` folder.
    - `xcopy "$(OutDir)*" "C:\Program Files\VertiGIS\VertiGIS Studio Workflow\CustomAssemblies" /Exclude:$(ProjectDir)excludedFiles.txt /y`
3. Run a rebuild and ensure all appropriate files are copied.

:::info Important
You may need to stop then restart VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server in order for the post build step to copy your custom code.
:::

## Next Steps

Check out the tutorials to learn how to build custom activities for VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server and augment them with third party libraries.

<UseCaseContainer>
    <UseCaseCard
        title="Implement a Custom Activity"
        description="Implement a custom activity for VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server"
        link={useBaseUrl(
            "docs/workflow/tutorial-server-calculate-logarithm-activity"
        )}
    />
    <UseCaseCard
        title="Reference a Third Party Library"
        description="Reference a third party library in custom code."
        link={useBaseUrl(
            "docs/workflow/sdk-server-reference-third-party-library"
        )}
    />
</UseCaseContainer>

Commit message:

Fix Calculate Logarithm example and clean up some things (#71)
* Company repos are under https://github.com/vertigis/ now,
  not https://github.com/geocortex/.
* Corrected url for link to intro of Wrkflow docs.
* Rename "Web AppBuilder for ArcGIS" to "ArcGIS Web AppBuilder".
* Add ExB and VSD to list of hosts.
* Update signature of `IActivityHandler.Execute()`.
* Rename Mobile example that was using Geocortex in the variable names.
* Update instructions for attaching to Workflow Server for debugging.
* Add EXB and VSD to list of tags for compatibility.
* Fix import paths used in Add Layer to Map example for VSW.

docs/workflow/sdk-server-overview.mdx, after:

---
title: Using the .NET Workflow SDK with VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server
sidebar_label: SDK Overview
description: VertiGIS Studio Workflow - Overview of extending workflow for VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server
---

import useBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import UseCaseContainer from "../../src/components/UseCaseContainer";
import UseCaseCard from "../../src/components/UseCaseCard";
import SdkLimitationsWarning from "./snippets/sdk-net-limitations-warning.mdx";

VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server can be extended by augmenting your on-premises installation with additional custom .NET assemblies.

## Requirements

Extending VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server requires administrative access to your on-premises installation of workflow.

## Development Environment

Visual Studio 2022 is the only officially supported development environment for extending VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server.

## Setting up a VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server Extension Project

Extending VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server requires you to produce a separate assembly with your custom activities, and copy that into your on-premises deployment of VertiGIS Studio Workflow. We first need to set up a project using Visual Studio that references the [workflow runtime](key-concepts.mdx#vertigis-studio-workflow-designer-and-runtime).

1. Launch Microsoft Visual Studio 2022.
1. Create a new project of type _Class Library_ (.NET Standard)
    - You can also create a project of type [.NET](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/learn/dotnet/what-is-dotnet) to take advantage of its larger feature set. If so, you need to go into the project settings and change the output type to `Class Library`
1. Edit the `.csproj` file in a text editor and add the `CopyLocalLockFileAssemblies` attribute to the `PropertyGroup`.

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.1</TargetFramework>
    <RootNamespace>CustomWorkflow</RootNamespace>
    // highlight-next-line
    <CopyLocalLockFileAssemblies>true</CopyLocalLockFileAssemblies>
</PropertyGroup>
```

-   This will copy the referenced nuget assemblies to the build output folder, which will be important for later.

1. [Add a reference](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/ide/how-to-add-or-remove-references-by-using-the-reference-manager?view=vs-2019) to the `VertiGIS.Workflow.Runtime` assembly.
   By default, this is located in`C:\Program Files\VertiGIS\VertiGIS Studio Workflow\Deployment\service`

:::info Important
.NET Standard projects **must** target .NET Standard 2.1, and .NET projects must target .NET 6.0, or else the assembly will be incompatible with VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server.
:::

<SdkLimitationsWarning />

Next, learn how to implement a [custom activity](tutorial-server-calculate-logarithm-activity.mdx) for VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server.

## Deploying VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server Activities

For VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server to find your custom activities, you need to copy the build output to a particular folder.

1. Build the project.
1. Find the build output on disk.
    1. In Visual Studio, right-click on your project in Solution Explorer and choose "Open Folder in File Explorer".
    1. Open the `bin` folder.
       If you do not see a`bin` folder, it is possible you right-clicked on the solution instead of the project.
    1. In the `bin` folder, open either `Debug` or `Release`, depending on which build configuration you used.
    1. In the `bin\Debug` or `bin\Release` folder, there will be one final sub-directory which will be `netstandard2.1`
       or `net6.0`. Open this folder.
    1. You should now see a number of files including `VertiGIS.Workflow.Runtime.dll` and your own project, such as `AssemblyNamespace.dll`.
1. Find the `CustomAssemblies` folder on disk.
    1. VertiGIS Studio Workflow looks in a folder called `CustomAssemblies` for assemblies that contain custom activities.
       This is located in the folder that you chose when installing VertiGIS Studio Workflow. The default location is
       `C:\Program Files\VertiGIS\VertiGIS Studio Workflow\CustomAssemblies`
1. Copy the relevant files from the build output to the `CustomAssemblies` folder.
    1. Copy your project's assembly. (e.g. `AssemblyNamespace.dll`)
    1. Copy any third-party libraries that your project relies on (these should have been output to the build folder)
    1. Copy any other configuration files or resources that your project relies on.
    1. **Do not** copy any files that start with `VertiGIS.Workflow.` They are not required in this folder.

:::note
If you created a .NET Project and see `AssemblyNamespace.exe`, you need to change the project output type to `Class Library`.
:::

:::info Important
You may need to stop VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server in IIS in order to copy your copy your custom code.
:::

## Debugging Server Workflow Activities

You can debug custom VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server activities by attaching to the VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server process from the VertiGIS Studio Workflow extension project you created.

1. Start Visual Studio 2022 with administrator privileges.
2. [Attach the debugger](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/debugger/debug-multiple-processes?view=vs-2019#BKMK_Attach_to_a_process) to the `w3wp.exe` process that is running as the VertiGISStudioWorkflow user.
    - You may need to check 'show processes from all users' to see it.
    - If you have customized the application pool assigned to your installation of VertiGIS Studio Workflow, the username may be different.
3. Set a breakpoint in your custom activity.
4. Run your server workflow that uses the custom activity. Your breakpoint should be hit.

## Automating Deployment of Server Workflow Activities

To automate the deployment to VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server, we have to add a post build step to the project that copies the build output.

1. Locate the `Custom Assemblies` folder in the VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server installation. The default location is `C:\Program Files\VertiGIS\VertiGIS Studio Workflow\CustomAssemblies`
2. Create a file `excluded_files.txt` at the root of the project that excludes the appropriate build output files as described in the [deployment section](#deploying-vertigis-studio-workflow-server-activities).

```
VertiGIS.Workflow.Runtime.dll
VertiGIS.Workflow.Runtime.xml
```

2. Edit the post build event in the project properties.
    - Add a command which copies the build output to the `Custom Assemblies` folder.
    - `xcopy "$(OutDir)*" "C:\Program Files\VertiGIS\VertiGIS Studio Workflow\CustomAssemblies" /Exclude:$(ProjectDir)excludedFiles.txt /y`
3. Run a rebuild and ensure all appropriate files are copied.

:::info Important
You may need to stop then restart VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server in order for the post build step to copy your custom code.
:::

## Next Steps

Check out the tutorials to learn how to build custom activities for VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server and augment them with third party libraries.

<UseCaseContainer>
    <UseCaseCard
        title="Implement a Custom Activity"
        description="Implement a custom activity for VertiGIS Studio Workflow Server"
        link={useBaseUrl(
            "docs/workflow/tutorial-server-calculate-logarithm-activity"
        )}
    />
    <UseCaseCard
        title="Reference a Third Party Library"
        description="Reference a third party library in custom code."
        link={useBaseUrl(
            "docs/workflow/sdk-server-reference-third-party-library"
        )}
    />
</UseCaseContainer>
