docs/workflow/tutorial-web-implement-star-rating-form-element.mdx, before:

---
title: Implement a Star Rating Custom Form Element
description: VertiGIS Studio Workflow - Implement a star rating form element for web applications
---

import useBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import WebPrereqs from "./snippets/prereqs-web.mdx";
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

Implementing a custom [form element](key-concepts.mdx#form-elements) allows you to augment the existing [form elements that come with VertiGIS Studio Workflow](https://docs.vertigisstudio.com/workflow/latest/help/Default.htm#wf5/help/form-elements/auto-complete.htm%3FTocPath%3DForms%7CForm%2520Element%2520Reference%7C_____0).

This article will walk you through creating a form element for rating that allows you to select up to five stars.

<img src={useBaseUrl("img/workflow-web-custom-star-rating.png")} />

## Prerequisites

<WebPrereqs />

Custom workflow form elements are built in TypeScript and [React](https://reactjs.org/).

## Overview

Implementing a custom form element for web applications just involves creating the custom form element and implementing the UI.

## Set up the Custom Form Element Skeleton

To create a new form element:

1. Open the Workflow activity SDK in Visual Studio Code.
1. Run `npm run generate` in the terminal.
1. When prompted, select `Form Element`.
1. Enter the name of the form element you would like to create and press `Enter`. For example, `StarRating`.
1. Open the newly created `src/elements/StarRating.tsx` file.

1. Create a new file `StarRating.tsx` in the activity SDK.
1. Create a skeleton React form element.

```tsx title="src/elements/StarRating.tsx"
import * as React from "react";
import {
    FormElementProps,
    FormElementRegistration,
} from "@vertigis/workflow";

interface StarRatingProps extends FormElementProps<number> {}

function StarRating(props: StarRatingProps): React.ReactElement {
    return <div>Hello. Is it me you're looking for.</div>;
}

const StarRatingElementRegistration: FormElementRegistration<StarRatingProps> =
    {
        component: StarRating,
        getInitialProperties: () => ({ value: 0 }),
        id: "StarRating",
    };

export default StarRatingElementRegistration;
```

## Build the Star Rating UI

Next, we are going to build the form element to display the five stars the user can select. Form Elements are just React elements, and use React patterns to define their UI.

First, let's build the star DOM elements.

```tsx title="src/elements/StarRating.tsx"
import * as React from "react";
import {
    FormElementProps,
    FormElementRegistration,
} from "@vertigis/workflow";

interface StarRatingProps extends FormElementProps<number> {}

function StarRating(props: StarRatingProps): React.ReactElement {
    const rating = 5;

    // Button style to show only the button content.
    const baseStyle: React.CSSProperties = {
        background: "none",
        border: "none",
        outline: "none",
        fontSize: "2em",
        padding: 0,
    };

    // Button styles to show selected and unselected states.
    const selectedStyle = { ...baseStyle, ...{ color: "#ffa91b" } };
    const unselectedStyle = { ...baseStyle, ...{ color: "#c6c6c6" } };

    // Create 5 buttons
    const buttons: JSX.Element[] = [];
    for (let i = 1; i <= 5; i++) {
        buttons.push(
            <button
                value={i}
                style={rating < i ? unselectedStyle : selectedStyle}
            >
                ★
            </button>
        );
    }

    return <div>{buttons}</div>;
}

const StarRatingElementRegistration: FormElementRegistration<StarRatingProps> =
    {
        component: StarRating,
        getInitialProperties: () => ({ value: 0 }),
        id: "StarRating",
    };

export default StarRatingElementRegistration;
```

## Add Interactivity and Expose the Form Element's Value

Next, we are going to add interactivity to the form element to show how many stars the user has selected.

<Tabs
  defaultValue="custom-form-element"
  values={[
    { label: "Star Rating Form Element", value: "custom-form-element" },
    { label: "User Interface", value: "ui" },
  ]}>
<TabItem value="custom-form-element">

```tsx title="src/elements/StarRating.tsx"
import * as React from "react";
import {
    FormElementProps,
    FormElementRegistration,
} from "@vertigis/workflow";

interface StarRatingProps extends FormElementProps<number> {}
    // highlight-start
    const { setValue, value } = props;

    const handleClick = (event) => {
        // Get the value from the button.
        // Parse as an integer because the value is a string in the event.
        const newValue = parseInt(event.target.value);

        if (value !== newValue) {
            // Update the element's value.
            setValue(newValue);
        }
    };
    // highlight-end

    // Button style to show only the button content.
    const baseStyle: React.CSSProperties = {
        background: "none",
        border: "none",
        outline: "none",
        fontSize: "2em",
        padding: 0,
    };

    // Button styles to show selected and unselected states.
    const selectedStyle = { ...baseStyle, ...{ color: "#ffa91b" } };
    const unselectedStyle = { ...baseStyle, ...{ color: "#c6c6c6" } };

    // Create 5 buttons
    const buttons: JSX.Element[] = [];
    for (let i = 1; i <= 5; i++) {
        buttons.push(
            <button
                // highlight-start
                onClick={handleClick}
                // highlight-end
                value={i}
                style={value < i ? unselectedStyle : selectedStyle}
            >
                ★
            </button>
        );
    }

    return <div>{buttons}</div>;
}

const StarRatingElementRegistration: FormElementRegistration<StarRatingProps> =
    {
        component: StarRating,
        getInitialProperties: () => ({ value: 0 }),
        id: "StarRating",
    };

export default StarRatingElementRegistration;
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ui">
<img src={useBaseUrl("img/workflow-web-custom-star-rating.png")}/>
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Deploy the Activity

Follow the instructions to [build and deploy the activity pack](sdk-web-overview.mdx#deployment).

## Test the Activity

Once your activity pack is hosted and registered, your custom form element should appear in the form element toolbox in VertiGIS Studio Workflow Designer alongside the built-in form elements, and can be used in the graphical interface like any other form element.

:::note

<p>
    You can
    <a
        href={useBaseUrl("workflows/web-custom-form-element.json")}
        download="custom-form-element.json"
        target="_blank"
    >
        {" "}
        download this demo workflow{" "}
    </a>
    that registers and displays the custom form element and then
    <a
        href="https://docs.vertigisstudio.com/workflow/latest/help/Default.htm#wf5/help/import-export-workflows.htm"
        target="_blank"
    >
        {" "}
        import it into the VertiGIS Studio Workflow Designer.{" "}
    </a>
    You will have to{" "}
    <a
        href={useBaseUrl(
            "docs/workflow/sdk-web-overview#host-the-activity-pack"
        )}
    >
        {" "}
        deploy the custom activity and form element
    </a>{" "}
    for it to function. This workflow assumes you are hosting the
    activity pack with the dev server on https://localhost:57999/.
</p>
:::

<img
    src={useBaseUrl("img/workflow-web-custom-form-element-basic.png")}
/>

Commit message:

Document how to set a form element's value at runtime (#60)
* Document how to set a form element's value at runtime

docs/workflow/tutorial-web-implement-star-rating-form-element.mdx, after:

---
title: Implement a Star Rating Custom Form Element
description: VertiGIS Studio Workflow - Implement a star rating form element for web applications
---

import useBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import WebPrereqs from "./snippets/prereqs-web.mdx";
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

Implementing a custom [form element](key-concepts.mdx#form-elements) allows you to augment the existing [form elements that come with VertiGIS Studio Workflow](https://docs.vertigisstudio.com/workflow/latest/help/Default.htm#wf5/help/form-elements/auto-complete.htm%3FTocPath%3DForms%7CForm%2520Element%2520Reference%7C_____0).

This article will walk you through creating a form element for rating that allows you to select up to five stars.

<img src={useBaseUrl("img/workflow-web-custom-star-rating.png")} />

## Prerequisites

<WebPrereqs />

Custom workflow form elements are built in TypeScript and [React](https://reactjs.org/).

## Overview

Implementing a custom form element for web applications just involves creating the custom form element and implementing the UI.

## Set up the Custom Form Element Skeleton

To create a new form element:

1. Open the Workflow activity SDK in Visual Studio Code.
1. Run `npm run generate` in the terminal.
1. When prompted, select `Form Element`.
1. Enter the name of the form element you would like to create and press `Enter`. For example, `StarRating`.
1. Open the newly created `src/elements/StarRating.tsx` file.

1. Create a new file `StarRating.tsx` in the activity SDK.
1. Create a skeleton React form element.

```tsx title="src/elements/StarRating.tsx"
import * as React from "react";
import {
    FormElementProps,
    FormElementRegistration,
} from "@vertigis/workflow";

interface StarRatingProps extends FormElementProps<number> {}

function StarRating(props: StarRatingProps): React.ReactElement {
    return <div>Hello. Is it me you're looking for.</div>;
}

const StarRatingElementRegistration: FormElementRegistration<StarRatingProps> =
    {
        component: StarRating,
        getInitialProperties: () => ({ value: 0 }),
        id: "StarRating",
    };

export default StarRatingElementRegistration;
```

## Build the Star Rating UI

Next, we are going to build the form element to display the five stars the user can select. Form Elements are just React elements, and use React patterns to define their UI.

First, let's build the star DOM elements.

```tsx title="src/elements/StarRating.tsx"
import * as React from "react";
import {
    FormElementProps,
    FormElementRegistration,
} from "@vertigis/workflow";

interface StarRatingProps extends FormElementProps<number> {}

function StarRating(props: StarRatingProps): React.ReactElement {
    const rating = 5;

    // Button style to show only the button content.
    const baseStyle: React.CSSProperties = {
        background: "none",
        border: "none",
        outline: "none",
        fontSize: "2em",
        padding: 0,
    };

    // Button styles to show selected and unselected states.
    const selectedStyle = { ...baseStyle, ...{ color: "#ffa91b" } };
    const unselectedStyle = { ...baseStyle, ...{ color: "#c6c6c6" } };

    // Create 5 buttons
    const buttons: JSX.Element[] = [];
    for (let i = 1; i <= 5; i++) {
        buttons.push(
            <button
                value={i}
                style={rating < i ? unselectedStyle : selectedStyle}
            >
                ★
            </button>
        );
    }

    return <div>{buttons}</div>;
}

const StarRatingElementRegistration: FormElementRegistration<StarRatingProps> =
    {
        component: StarRating,
        getInitialProperties: () => ({ value: 0 }),
        id: "StarRating",
    };

export default StarRatingElementRegistration;
```

## Add Interactivity and Expose the Form Element's Value

Next, we are going to add interactivity to the form element to show how many stars the user has selected.

<Tabs
  defaultValue="custom-form-element"
  values={[
    { label: "Star Rating Form Element", value: "custom-form-element" },
    { label: "User Interface", value: "ui" },
  ]}>
<TabItem value="custom-form-element">

```tsx title="src/elements/StarRating.tsx"
import * as React from "react";
import {
    FormElementProps,
    FormElementRegistration,
} from "@vertigis/workflow";

interface StarRatingProps extends FormElementProps<number> {}
    // highlight-start
    const { setValue, value } = props;

    const handleClick = (event) => {
        // Get the value from the button.
        // Parse as an integer because the value is a string in the event.
        const newValue = parseInt(event.target.value);

        if (value !== newValue) {
            // Update the element's value.
            setValue(newValue);
        }
    };
    // highlight-end

    // Button style to show only the button content.
    const baseStyle: React.CSSProperties = {
        background: "none",
        border: "none",
        outline: "none",
        fontSize: "2em",
        padding: 0,
    };

    // Button styles to show selected and unselected states.
    const selectedStyle = { ...baseStyle, ...{ color: "#ffa91b" } };
    const unselectedStyle = { ...baseStyle, ...{ color: "#c6c6c6" } };

    // Create 5 buttons
    const buttons: JSX.Element[] = [];
    for (let i = 1; i <= 5; i++) {
        buttons.push(
            <button
                // highlight-start
                onClick={handleClick}
                // highlight-end
                value={i}
                style={value < i ? unselectedStyle : selectedStyle}
            >
                ★
            </button>
        );
    }

    return <div>{buttons}</div>;
}

const StarRatingElementRegistration: FormElementRegistration<StarRatingProps> =
    {
        component: StarRating,
        getInitialProperties: () => ({ value: 0 }),
        id: "StarRating",
    };

export default StarRatingElementRegistration;
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="ui">
<img src={useBaseUrl("img/workflow-web-custom-star-rating.png")}/>
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Deploy the Form Element

Follow the instructions to [build and deploy the activity pack](sdk-web-overview.mdx#deployment).

## Test the Form Element

Once your activity pack is hosted and registered, your custom form element should appear in the form element toolbox in VertiGIS Studio Workflow Designer alongside the built-in form elements, and can be used in the graphical interface like any other form element.

:::note

<p>
    You can
    <a
        href={useBaseUrl("workflows/web-custom-form-element.json")}
        download="custom-form-element.json"
        target="_blank"
    >
        {" "}
        download this demo workflow{" "}
    </a>
    that registers and displays the custom form element and then
    <a
        href="https://docs.vertigisstudio.com/workflow/latest/help/Default.htm#wf5/help/import-export-workflows.htm"
        target="_blank"
    >
        {" "}
        import it into the VertiGIS Studio Workflow Designer.{" "}
    </a>
    You will have to{" "}
    <a
        href={useBaseUrl(
            "docs/workflow/sdk-web-overview#host-the-activity-pack"
        )}
    >
        {" "}
        deploy the custom activity and form element
    </a>{" "}
    for it to function. This workflow assumes you are hosting the
    activity pack with the dev server on https://localhost:57999/.
</p>
:::

<img src={useBaseUrl("img/workflow-web-custom-star-rating.png")} />

## Set the Form Element's Value at Runtime

Depending on the use case for the custom form element you may want to display it with an initial value that that is provided at runtime by the workflow. In the case of the Star Rating form element we may want to initially select four stars, or some number computed by the workflow.

To assign a `value` to a custom form element at runtime:

1. Open your workflow in VertiGIS Studio Workflow Designer.
1. Double-click the `Display Form` activity that contains the custom form element.
1. Select the custom form element.
1. Expand the `Events` section of the properties panel.
1. On the `load` event click `Add` or `Edit`.
1. Add a `Set Form Element Property` activity from the toolbox to the subworkflow.
1. Set the `Property Name` input to `value`
1. Set the `Property Value` input to an expression that assigns the desired value. For example:
    - Literal value: `4`
    - Variable value: `=$numberOfStars.result`

:::note
You can use the `Set Form Element Property` activity to assign a value to any prop of a custom form element React component.
:::
